📖 Cluster API Kubelet Authentication (#4219)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20210222-kubelet-authentication.md

  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

- **OID:** Object Identifier defined by the International Telecommunications Union and used in PKI to identify attributes on certificates.

- **PKI:** Public Key Infrastructure

- **TPM:** Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a specification defined by the Trusted Computing Group (TCG) that allows hosts to attest to their identity via PKI and a secure crypto-processor which may either be a separate chip, built into the CPU or a virtual device provided by the hypervisor.

## Summary

This proposal outlines a method to secure node registration within Cluster API, to solve 3 primary problems:
- Solving a class of attacks involving node impersonation allowing an attacker to access secrets and volumes they shouldn’t by using hardware attestation of node identity.

> - Prevent token reuse in MachinePools where the token cannot be easily rotated.

Reviewer: can you expand on this? I don't see it mentioned in the proposal?

Currently, the MachinePool bootstrap token does get rotated and has the same TTL (15mn) as Machine bootstrap tokens

Reviewer 2: How does the bootstrap token get rotated? This would imply a change in userdata for the MachinePool. Is that supported on Azure?

Reviewer 2: I've removed this text now that we've got to the bottom of what was happening in CAPA.

## Motivation

Cluster API default core components are largely reliant on kubeadm for cluster bootstrapping and node registration. Kubeadm is a platform-agnostic command line tool designed to assist users to bootstrap Kubernetes clusters, and is used as a building block in Cluster API.
Because kubeadm is platform-independent and is intended to provide an “easy path” to cluster bootstrapping,  there are a number of inherent design decisions that limit the overall security of the provisioned cluster:
- Kubeadm uses TLS bootstrapping for node registration, however the default workflow used by Cluster API uses bootstrap token which allow registration as arbitrary node names.
    - When used in this mode, Kubeadm essentially does “client-side validation” to prevent node hijacking, but this does not mean the token cannot be reused by an attacker within the lifetime of the token to perform a hijack.

>     - Cluster API cannot scope a token down  to a specific node, because bootstrap providers, nor most infrastructure providers know the identity of the node ahead of time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Cluster API cannot scope a token down to a specific node, because bootstrap providers, nor most infrastructure providers know the identity of the node ahead of time.
```

- Kubeadm sets node labels during bootstrapping, and Cluster API does not do reconciliation of node labels post node deployment.
    - This is helpful because it means the kubelet starts with the labels applied straightaway, preventing a race condition when the Kubernetes schedule may misplace a pod due to a temporarily missing node label.

>     - However, again, this allows for potential hijacking, for example, using the kubelet’s credentials to apply a label intended for workloads not using the kubernetes.io/node-restriction-* labels.

Reviewer 4: i don't think arbitrary labels for workload targeting are recommended in any case.
a kubelet cannot self-apply any of the `kubernetes.io/*` labels IIRC.

Author: my understanding was that we only restricted `node-restriction.kubernetes.io/*` other `kubernetes.io/*` are still allowed per https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/admission-controllers/#noderestriction

Reviewer 2: Removed text. Not needed, deferring to #493

### Goals

> - Provide a bootstrap mechanism that assures node secure node registration

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Provide a bootstrap mechanism that assures secure node registration
```

> - The node registration 

Reviewer 4: expend the sentence?

> ### Non-Goals/Future Work

Reviewer: can we also add the scope of this proposal in terms of providers? Is it expected to work with all infra providers? all bootstrap providers or just kubeadm?

Author: `node-attestation-controller` isn't depending on kubeadm itself. So the controller can be re-used. As for the scope, yes I'd expect this to be running for all infra providers if/when using #4221

Author: added as a goal that it's expected to work with any provider (i.e. status quo like in v1a3 and enhanced features for the providers who are able to support it)

> - Not to change assumptions around management cluster to workload cluster connectivity

Reviewer: isn't this more of a goal? ie. to not change it

Reviewer 2: Removed the double negative

> - Not to solve the protection of initial cluster bootstrap secrets for the control plane nodes (see Node Bootstrapper)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Solve the protection of initial cluster bootstrap secrets for the control plane nodes (see Node Bootstrapper)
```

## Proposal

| Component | Location | Description |
| --------- | -------- | ----------- |

> | node-attestation-controller     | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism.     |   A controller to verify and sign the CSR. this would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR approval + Start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary.   |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| node-attestation-controller     | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism.     |   A controller to verify and sign the CSR. This would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR <expand this> approval and start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary.   |
```

Author: Yes

#### Kubelet authentication plugin

> ![sequence diagram](images/kubelet-authentication/bootstrap-flow.png)

Reviewer: I can't see any of the diagrams, https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/master/docs/proposals/images/kubelet-authentication/bootstrap-flow.png returns 404

Author: this link is pointing to the cluster-api repo. can't diagrams be viewed when using `View file` ?

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> The following sequence diagram shows at a high level how a nodeConfig enables bootstrapping a kubernetes node. This sequence diagram is independent of API definition and alternatives and is relevant in all cases.

Reviewer 4: nit, `kubernetes` should be uppercase across the doc.

Author: will do

Reviewer 2: Done

> We propose a kubelet authentication plugin to be present on the instances, (how the nodeadm CLI made available is out of scope for this proposal), which will be responsible for node registration, as well as certificate rotation. The agent will be made up of two parts:

Reviewer: > how the nodeadm CLI made available is out of scope for this proposal

this needs to be defined in future goals if it's out of scope

Author: I need to reword this, make it downloadable on the fly is out of scope, how it's made available initially is going to be through image-builder

> We propose a kubelet authentication plugin to be present on the instances, (how the nodeadm CLI made available is out of scope for this proposal), which will be responsible for node registration, as well as certificate rotation. The agent will be made up of two parts:

Author: I'll expand a bit on the plan to rollout this one

- A common library vendored from Cluster API which includes the following functionality:
    - Certificate filesystem locking
    - Checking existing certificate validity

>     - Certificate signing request generation for both kubernetes client and serving certificates

Reviewer 4: s/kubernetes/kubelet ?

Reviewer 2: Done

    - Submission of CSRs to the API server and waiting for approval
- A provider specific implementation for node attestation
    - A provider will only need to implement the generation of the attestation to be included in the CSR and the retrieval of the provider ID to be stored in an X.509 extension attribute.

The behaviour of the authentication plugin will be as follows:

#### Node Attestation

As for the node-attestation-controller, the following interface needs to be implemented by the infrastructure providers:

> ```go=

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```go
```

type ClusterAPISigner interface {
     VerifyClientAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
     VerifyServingAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

This will enable infrastructure providers to perform infrastructure-specific validation of node attestations (TPM, appended tags by the provider etc…)

Cluster API will be responsible for partially verifying node identity through verifying that:

> - a corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` ( `system:nodes:<nodename>`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` (`system:nodes:<nodename>`)
```

> - The Machine state is provisioning

Reviewer 3: We shouldn't rely on the state to determine a state, but rather look at all the other variables to determine that the machine hasn't been provisioned, for example Status.NodeRef is not present.

Author: ack

- The kubernetes CSR spec has the needed groups
- The kubernetes CSR spec is limited to needed usages (e.g. client auth)
- The kubernetes CSR spec is limited to needed extensions (e.g. no CA extension)
- Parse the CSR and verify that the CN is the same as .spec.username
- Parse the CSR and verify that the Organization is the same as .spec.Groups
- Parse the CSR and ensure that no SANs are appended for kubelet client certificates

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

#### CSR format used by nodeadm

> We propose the introduction of X.509 extension attributes based on those reserved for the Kubernetes GCP cloud provider within Google’s organization ID allocation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We propose the introduction of X.509 extension attributes based 
on those reserved for the Kubernetes GCP cloud provider within Google’s organization ID allocation.
```

We will request via SIG Architecture or CNCF to apply for an IANA OID registration block for the Kubernetes project.

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

|  OID Suffix |  Name |  Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2.1.21     | KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID     | An identifier for the machine, should be the same or a derivative of the node provider ID. This is the equivalent of Google’s CloudComputeInstanceIdentifierOID, which we can reuse for a proof of concept (1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.1.21). |

#### CSR PEM Blocks

| Block Name |  Description |
| -------- | -------- |
| NODEADM ATTESTATION PROVIDER     | string describing the attestation provider     |
| NODEADM ATTESTATION DATA | the actual attestation data to perform validation on |

#### attestation data

Attestation data will be appended, with any relevant base64 encoded data wrapped with the following header & footer. 

Example CSR:
```
-----BEGIN ATTESTATION DATA-----
S25vd2luZyBtZSBBbGFuIFBhcnRyaWRnZSwga25vd2luZyB5b3UgS3ViZXJuZXRlcyBjbHVzdGVyLCBhaGEh
-----END ATTESTATION DATA-----
```
The format of the attestation block is left to the provider. The Appendix section provides examples.

#### Kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon

> The kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon will run as a systemd or windows service manager service on the node. It will check for the existence of the serving certificate files, and either check their validity and that they are not self signed, or request a new serving certificate. Once the new serving certificate is written, kubelet can be restarted.

Reviewer 5: Could/Should some of this be done by kubelet itself?

I'm struggling a bit with the proposal with what should be done at the cluster api level and what should be done by kubeadm or kubernetes(kubelet) itself.

I think kubeadm has had an open ticket for implementing kubelet serving certificate rotation for a while.

#### Core Specification
- Core Cluster API MUST provide the following implementations of CSRs and signers:

>     - cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure which implement an “Always Allow” type signer that provides equivalent security to Cluster API v1alpha3. This is only to be used for providers where no secure mechanism exists.

Reviewer 3: Shoul
```suggestion
    - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure` which implement an “Always Allow” type signer that provides equivalent security to Cluster API v1alpha3. This is only to be used for providers where no secure mechanism exists.
```

>     - cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm and cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm` and `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
```

        - Will implement TPM-based certificate signers and requesters based on the cloud-provider-gcp implementation.
        - However, since the mechanism for retrieving endorsement keys varies across platforms, the TPM signer will additionally require a provider specific mechanism to provide the TPM Endorsement Key.

#### Provider Specification

#### All providers

> - All providers must insert a ProviderID within the KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID extension attribute of the CSR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- All providers MUST insert a ProviderID within the KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID extension attribute of the CSR
```

> - All signer names must be filled in by the provider’s controller in InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner and InfraCluster.Status.KubeletServingCertificateSigner

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- All signer names MUST be filled in by the provider’s controller in InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner and InfraCluster.Status.KubeletServingCertificateSigner
```

#### Insecure providers

> - An insecure provider MUST not implement certificate rotation or kubelet serving certificate signing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- An insecure provider CANNOT implement certificate rotation or kubelet serving certificate signing
```

- An insecure provider MUST use the cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure signer/v1alpha4

#### Secure providers
- A secure provider MUST implement certificate rotation and kubelet server certificate signing
- A provider must register signers of:
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-<provider>/v1alpha4`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-<provider>/v1alpha4`
- A secure provider MUST implement a secure attestation mechanism, based upon PEM-encoded blocks within the Certificate Signing Request.
- Where a secure provider’s attestation mechanism does not include a nonce or timestamp to protect against replay attacks, the mechanism MUST implement a secondary time-limited attestation (e.g. AWS Instance Identity document + AWS HMACv4 signature).
- A provider’s signer MUST run on the management cluster

#### TPM based providers
- A TPM provider MUST use the following certificate signers
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm/v1alpha4`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm/v1alpha4`
- A TPM provider MUST annotate new CSRs as follows:

>     - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key/v1alpha4

Reviewer 3: How do we support multiple versions in the future?

Author: I removed this. we don't actually need to version the signers.

    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter)

#### Kubeadm
Since this proposal essentially takes over part of the node registration process from kubeadm, we will require the following changes:

> - kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up ClusterRoleBindings between the system:nodes group and the `system:certificates.k8s.io:certificatesigningrequests:selfnodeclient` permission, so that certificate renewals must go through re-attestation. However, Cluster API kubeadm control plane provider is able to reconcile the removal of these roles during control plane instantiation.

Reviewer 4: it would be difficult to add a knob for this specifically, maybe under ClusterConfiguration. but definitely not on the CLI.
since CAPI is one of the projects partially blocking kubeadm's API progress we can't add it anywhere for the time being.

Reviewer 2: I've noted this in a following paragraph, and we will reconciliate the removal in KubeadmControlPlane for now.

> - Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up the bootstrapper and node groups and bindings.

Reviewer 4: could you elaborate on what does this entail?

Reviewer 2: Do we need details here, or can we defer to a Kubeadm KEP for v1beta3?

Reviewer 4: we already discussed what is planned for v1beta3 and established some priorities.
i would prefer to see some details here, even as a comment, before we jump into a KEP.

Reviewer 2: Updated

#### Kubelet authenticator flow

The authenticator will be responsible for both updating the kubelet client and serving certificates.

![kubelet auth](images/kubelet-authentication/kubelet-auth.png)

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### User Stories

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

#### Story 1: machine attestation

> A cluster operator has been asked to ensure compliance with NIST SP 800-190 Application Container Security Guide. Hardware countermeasure 4.6 suggests that container platforms should make use of trusted computing. In a Kubernetes context, this would mean providing hardware node attestation wherever possible. Each cloud provider supports different mechanisms for this (see Appendix). (cluster-api/3762

Reviewer 4: a link to the NIST PDF would be nice here.

Reviewer 4: the trailing `(cluster-api/3762` seems incomplete.

Reviewer 2: Done , cleaned up.

### Requirements (Optional)

The node bootstrapper MUST be able to attest the identity of the machine against a chain of trust provided by the hardware or cloud provider.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> - What are some important details that didn't come across above.
> - What are the caveats to the implementation?
> - Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
> - Talk about core concepts and how they releate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### Security Model

Document the intended security model for the proposal, including implications
on the Kubernetes RBAC model. Questions you may want to answer include:

* Does this proposal implement security controls or require the need to do so?
  * If so, consider describing the different roles and permissions with tables.

> * Are their adequate security warnings where appropriate (see https://adam.shostack.org/ReederEtAl_NEATatMicrosoft.pdf for guidance).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Are there adequate security warnings where appropriate (see https://adam.shostack.org/ReederEtAl_NEATatMicrosoft.pdf for guidance)?
```

not sure if this is mean to be a Q.

> * Are regex expressions going to be used, and are their appropriate defenses against DOS.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Are regex expressions going to be used, and are their appropriate defenses against DOS?
```

* Is any sensitive data being stored in a secret, and only exists for as long as necessary?

### Risks and Mitigations

There may be additional security risks being introduced in this design. In order to mitigate this, this proposal will be taken to SIG Security and SIG Auth for review **before the beta graduation**.

## Alternatives

#### Implement within the cloud providers instead of Cluster API

> Given that there is an extant implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for kubelet registration:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given that there is an existant implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for kubelet registration:
```

> - Cluster API can create the node resource as part of the CSR approval process and apply the relevant taints, labels and roles up front. The Kubernetes Cloud Provider contract has no understanding of the desired state of a node.

Reviewer 4: at one point i was playing with manually creating a Node object and i don't think the kubelet liked that very much.
don't recall all the details, but it never became Ready or something like that.

Reviewer 2: Me and @yastij reviewed the kubelet code, and it seemed to be ok. Nevertheless, we don't need to pre-create the node, so have revised this text.

- No changes to the assumptions around connectivity between management and workload clusters are required, neither does the signer need to be included as a static pod during control plane instantiation.

#### Implement as authentication webhook, as per aws-iam-authenticator (Amazon EKS)
If attestation was implemented as an authentication webhook, it would be in the critical path for all token-based authentication against the API server. It would also additionally be needed to be set up at workload cluster instantiation via a static pod and API server start up.

## Upgrade Strategy

> for the upgrade strategy please refer to the cluster API node bootstrapper proposal

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for the upgrade strategy please refer to the Cluster API node bootstrapper proposal
```

## Additional Details

### Test Plan [optional]

- E2E tests to be added to AWS, vSphere and Azure providers as each provider implements the signer
- E2E tests to be added for the insecure signers for use with CAPD.
Upgrade tests from latest minor release to latest main branch of Kubernetes 

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

#### Graduation to beta

> - E2E tests testing upgrades to latest main branch of Kubernetes are required such that Cluster API can make appropriate changes to node registration if kubelet or kubeadm behaviour changes.

Reviewer 4: CAPI needs a way for a quick-er image build, or something i suggested instead is to have a periodic image build job - e.g. once, twice a day.

> - Security review by SIG Auth and SIG Security
> #### Graduation to GA

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

- Security review by SIG Auth and SIG Security
#### Graduation to GA
```

- Beta for 2 releases
- Optionally, external security review of the combined Cluster API and kubeadm model.

### Version Skew Strategy [optional]

> There shouldn’t be any version skew issues between nodeadm  and the bootstrapper, As the only interaction between the two is through the CSR API.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There shouldn’t be any version skew issues between nodeadm  and the bootstrapper, as the only interaction between the two is through the CSR API.
```

Any changes to the attestation data should be handled in a backward compatible manner by the infrastructure provider when implementing the interface used by the node-attestation-controller, by making sure it's able to convert an older attestation format to a newer one.

## Implementation History

- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Proposed idea in an issue or [community meeting]
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Compile a Google Doc following the CAEP template (link here)
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: First round of feedback from community
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Present proposal at a [community meeting]

> - [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Open proposal PR

Reviewer 4: were some of the above steps skipped?

Author: I can add the google doc for the new bootstrapper proposal,  @randomvariable and I wanted split node attestation into its own proposal for a better reviewing experience

Reviewer 2: Updated

This node attestation mechanism will be optional in the initial implementation, and can potentially be used independently of Cluster API.

## Motivation

Cluster API default core components are largely reliant on kubeadm for cluster bootstrapping and node registration. Kubeadm is a platform-agnostic command line tool designed to assist users to bootstrap Kubernetes clusters, and is used as a building block in Cluster API.
Because kubeadm is platform-independent and is intended to provide an “easy path” to cluster bootstrapping,  there are a number of inherent design decisions that limit the overall security of the provisioned cluster:
- Kubeadm uses TLS bootstrapping for node registration, however the default workflow used by Cluster API uses bootstrap token which allow registration as arbitrary node names.
    - When used in this mode, Kubeadm essentially does “client-side validation” to prevent node hijacking, but this does not mean the token cannot be reused by an attacker within the lifetime of the token to perform a hijack.

>     - Cluster API cannot scope a token down to a specific node, because bootstrap providers, nor most infrastructure providers know the identity of the node ahead of time.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    - Cluster API cannot scope a token down to a specific node, because neither bootstrap providers, nor most infrastructure providers know the identity of the node ahead of time.
```

    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm/v1alpha4`
- A TPM provider MUST annotate new CSRs as follows:
    - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key/v1alpha4
    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter)

#### Kubeadm
Since this proposal essentially takes over part of the node registration process from kubeadm, we will require the following changes:
- kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up ClusterRoleBindings between the system:nodes group and the `system:certificates.k8s.io:certificatesigningrequests:selfnodeclient` permission, so that certificate renewals must go through re-attestation.
- Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up the bootstrapper and node groups and bindings.

This is deferred to a future Kubeadm design and release, and for this proposal, we will add fields to KubeadmControlPlane to remove these node groups and bindings post control plane initialisation.

#### Changes to KubeadmControlPlane

```

```

#### Kubelet authenticator flow

The authenticator will be responsible for both updating the kubelet client and serving certificates.

> ![kubelet auth](images/kubelet-authentication/kubelet-auth.png)

Reviewer 7: I think the false edge should not go to `Begin kubelet serviing CSR process`:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/4662360/113105944-76768200-9202-11eb-997f-b19b16732bee.png)

Reviewer 2: It's actually correct in the plantuml that i'm about to upload, it just rendered really badly
let me try and sort out.

Reviewer 2: rendered really badly. i  changed "true" , "false" to more specific wording and separated out the two diagrams.

    - Certificate filesystem locking
    - Checking existing certificate validity
    - Certificate signing request generation for both kubelet client and serving certificates
    - Submission of CSRs to the API server and waiting for approval
- A provider specific implementation for node attestation
    - A provider will only need to implement the generation of the attestation to be included in the CSR and the retrieval of the provider ID to be stored in an X.509 extension attribute.

The behaviour of the authentication plugin will be as follows:

#### Node Attestation

As for the node-attestation-controller, the following interface needs to be implemented by the infrastructure providers:
```go
type ClusterAPISigner interface {
     VerifyClientAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
     VerifyServingAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
}
```

This enables infrastructure providers to perform infrastructure-specific validation of node attestations (TPM, appended tags by the provider, etc.)

Cluster API is responsible for partially verifying node identity with the following conditions:

> - A corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` (`system:nodes:<nodename>`)

Reviewer 8: With this conditions would it be a concern that as a malicious entity I generate enough workload as to trigger autoscaling which results in "infinite" number of new machines created so I can expect one nodeName to match my malicious handcrafted CSRs and therefore impersonating a node?

Reviewer 2: Infra provider will still need to verify host attestation and should ultimately reject it, so we'd defer it to a infra provider concern, but it is a valid consideration.

Reviewer 2: Added statement

| ---------- | ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2.1.21     | KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID | An identifier for the machine, should be the same or a derivative of the node provider ID. This is the equivalent of Google’s CloudComputeInstanceIdentifierOID, which we can reuse for a proof of concept (1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.1.21). |

#### CSR PEM Blocks

| Block Name                   | Description                                          |
| ---------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| NODEADM ATTESTATION PROVIDER | string describing the attestation provider           |
| NODEADM ATTESTATION DATA     | the actual attestation data to perform validation on |

> #### attestation data

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### Attestation data
```

Attestation data will be appended, with any relevant base64 encoded data wrapped with the following header & footer.

Example CSR:
```
-----BEGIN ATTESTATION DATA-----
S25vd2luZyBtZSBBbGFuIFBhcnRyaWRnZSwga25vd2luZyB5b3UgS3ViZXJuZXRlcyBjbHVzdGVyLCBhaGEh
-----END ATTESTATION DATA-----
```
The format of the attestation block is left to the provider. The Appendix section provides examples.

#### Kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon

> The kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon runs as a systemd or windows service manager service on the node. It checks for the existence of the serving certificate files, their validity (e.g. not self signed), or request a new serving certificate. Once the new serving certificate is written, kubelet can be restarted.

Reviewer 4: in the future it might start reloading it dynamically.
there is an untracked effort to make this possible "one cert at a time" in various components.

Reviewer 2: I've added a statement to this affect. Also, there is a slight possibility that we don't need a separate systemd service, so have added a statement about that as well.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

| Component                   | Location                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | node-attestation-controller | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism. | A controller to verify and sign the CSR. This would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR <expand this> approval and start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary. |

Author: fixed

    - Certificate filesystem locking
    - Checking existing certificate validity
    - Certificate signing request generation for both kubelet client and serving certificates
    - Submission of CSRs to the API server and waiting for approval
- A provider specific implementation for node attestation
    - A provider will only need to implement the generation of the attestation to be included in the CSR and the retrieval of the provider ID to be stored in an X.509 extension attribute.

The behaviour of the authentication plugin will be as follows:

#### Node Attestation

As for the node-attestation-controller, the following interface needs to be implemented by the infrastructure providers:
```go
type ClusterAPISigner interface {
     VerifyClientAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
     VerifyServingAttestationData (csr *certificatesv1beta1.CertificateSigningRequest) err
}
```

This enables infrastructure providers to perform infrastructure-specific validation of node attestations (TPM, appended tags by the provider, etc.)

Cluster API is responsible for partially verifying node identity with the following conditions:

> - A corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` (`system:nodes:<nodename>`)

Author: this should be inferred from the attestation data that is created by nodeadm as part of bootstrap. I'll add a func to the interface for it

> - A corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` (`system:nodes:<nodename>`)

Author: fixed

> - A corresponding machine object exist for the `.spec.Username` (`system:nodes:<nodename>`)

Author: done

> - The Machine should have conditions BootstrapReady.

Author: this is a must

- The Kubernetes CSR spec has the needed groups
- The Kubernetes CSR spec is limited to needed usages (e.g. client auth)
- The Kubernetes CSR spec is limited to needed extensions (e.g. no CA extension)
- Parse the CSR and verify that the CN is the same as .spec.username
- Parse the CSR and verify that the Organization is the same as .spec.Groups
- Parse the CSR and ensure that no SANs are appended for kubelet client certificates

#### CSR format used by kubelet-authenticator
We propose the introduction of X.509 extension attributes based
on those reserved for the Kubernetes GCP cloud provider within Google’s organization ID allocation.

> We will request via SIG Architecture or CNCF to apply for an IANA OID registration block for the Kubernetes project.

Reviewer 3: Could we link to the request here and open an issue to to track its status?

> We will request via SIG Architecture or CNCF to apply for an IANA OID registration block for the Kubernetes project.

Reviewer 4: i think this should be a k/k ticket, if so.
may have to pass sig-auth zoom meeting discussion first.

> We will request via SIG Architecture or CNCF to apply for an IANA OID registration block for the Kubernetes project.

Author: @randomvariable and I did reach out to @dims - but we didn't file it yet

| OID Suffix | Name                                | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 2.1.21     | KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID | An identifier for the machine, should be the same or a derivative of the node provider ID. This is the equivalent of Google’s CloudComputeInstanceIdentifierOID, which we can reuse for a proof of concept (1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.1.21). |

#### CSR PEM Blocks

> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

| Block Name                                 | Description                                          |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| KUBELET AUTHENTICATOR ATTESTATION PROVIDER | string describing the attestation provider           |
| KUBELET AUTHENTICATOR ATTESTATION DATA     | the actual attestation data to perform validation on |

#### Attestation data

Attestation data will be appended, with any relevant base64 encoded data wrapped with the following header & footer.

Example CSR:
```
-----BEGIN ATTESTATION DATA-----
S25vd2luZyBtZSBBbGFuIFBhcnRyaWRnZSwga25vd2luZyB5b3UgS3ViZXJuZXRlcyBjbHVzdGVyLCBhaGEh
-----END ATTESTATION DATA-----
```
The format of the attestation block is left to the provider. The Appendix section provides examples.

> #### Kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon

Reviewer 9: What about adding a note about the fact that we are not tacking care of the daemon lifecycle given that the machine are immutable from a CAPI PoV?

Author: added a comment for this

In the first attempt, we will attempt to run serving certificate rotation as part of the client authenticator - it will
check for the existence of the serving certificate files, their validity (e.g. not self signed), or request a new serving certificate. Once the new serving certificate is written, kubelet can be restarted.

> We may however find that it is better suited to run as a windows service manager service on the node.

Reviewer 3: This statement seems random. I'd assume this is an exception for Windows?

Author: Yes

There is a un untracked effort to make components automatically reload when certificates are changed, and will follow up

> as appropriate.

Reviewer 3: We should track this effort in an issue and link it here.

Author: @neolit123 - any issue we can add to this ?

> #### All providers

Reviewer 4: i think the providers here should be on the `#####` level

Reviewer 2: Fixed. All of these should have been under implementation details.

#### Core Specification
- Core Cluster API MUST provide the following implementations of CSRs and signers:
    - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure` which implement an “Always Allow” type signer that provides equivalent security to Cluster API v1alpha3. This is only to be used for providers where no secure mechanism exists.
    - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm` and `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
        - Will implement TPM-based certificate signers and requesters based on the cloud-provider-gcp implementation.
        - However, since the mechanism for retrieving endorsement keys varies across platforms, the TPM signer will additionally require a provider specific mechanism to provide the TPM Endorsement Key.

#### Provider Specification

##### All providers
- All providers MUST insert a ProviderID within the KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID extension attribute of the CSR

> - All signer names MUST be filled in by the provider’s controller in InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner and InfraCluster.Status.KubeletServingCertificateSigner

Author: No, it's still optional. If you're not running the attestation controller, those fields wouldn't be filled. I'll add some clarification

> - All signer names MUST be filled in by the provider’s controller in InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner and InfraCluster.Status.KubeletServingCertificateSigner

Author: fixed

> - All providers SHOULD implement trust-on-first-use type mechanisms to prevent replay attacks

Reviewer 10: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trust_on_first_use ?

> - All providers SHOULD implement trust-on-first-use type mechanisms to prevent replay attacks

Reviewer 2: Updating

    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter)

> #### Kubeadm

Reviewer 4: i think, we actually might have another problem here because kubeadm hardcodes the kubelet cert rotation to "true". we don't want to, but the problem is that there is no way to tell if the users specified it explicitly as "false".
(the field is a `bool` and `*bool` and the default of any empty go struct is `false`).

if kubeadm continues to manage the kubeletconfiguration in this proposal, i'd assume cert rotation must be set to `false`?
adding support for kubeletconfiguration patches per node is a workaround, but CAPI cannot use them declaratively yet because they are not in the kubeadm config.

Author: yeah we will need to disable client cert rotation. does kubeadm provide a possibility to apply patches. If not, we'll workaround it in the bootstrap script

Reviewer 4: patches for the KubeletConfiguration are not supported.
currently joining nodes inherit a global KubeletConfiguration passed to kubeadm init.

the whole `*bool` problem makes it difficult to solve.

this can be done in the following way:
- kubeadm init is called
- the /var/lib/kubelet/config.yaml on the init node is modified to disable rotate
- the kubelet there is restarted
- the kube-system/kubelet-config-x.yy is patched to disable rotation too so that joining nodes don't have it.

Reviewer 3: What are the side effects of not having kubelet certificate rotation in place? The point @neolit123 raised here seems it warrants some details in the proposal

##### Secure providers
- A secure provider MUST implement certificate rotation and kubelet server certificate signing
- A provider must register signers of:
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-<provider>`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-<provider>`
- A secure provider MUST implement a secure attestation mechanism, based upon PEM-encoded blocks within the Certificate Signing Request.
- Where a secure provider’s attestation mechanism does not include a nonce or timestamp to protect against replay attacks, the mechanism MUST implement a secondary time-limited attestation (e.g. AWS Instance Identity document + AWS HMACv4 signature).
- A provider’s signer MUST run on the management cluster

##### TPM based providers
- A TPM provider MUST use the following certificate signers
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
- A TPM provider MUST annotate new CSRs as follows:
    - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key
    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter)

#### Kubeadm

> Since this proposal essentially takes over part of the node registration process from kubeadm, we will require the following changes:

Reviewer 9: Show we assume also an option for skipping token generation during kubeadm init?

Also, it is not fully cleat to me what is the expected coordination mechanism between kubeadm init/joint and the node bootstrapper. More specifically
- kubeadm init creates kubelet credentials for the first node in order to avoid a chicken egg problem. How are we envisioning the Kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon taking charge of those credentials/certificate rotation
- kubeadm join, when skipping the token TLS bootstrap, requires a kubeconfig file to access the cluster. How we make sure kubeadm waits for the credentials generated by the node attestation plugin?

Author: As discussed I'll add a section on how we're planning on using https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#configuration for kubelet's kubeconfig

Author: added

- kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up ClusterRoleBindings between the system:nodes group and the `system:certificates.k8s.io:certificatesigningrequests:selfnodeclient` permission, so that certificate renewals must go through re-attestation.
- Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

> This is deferred to a future Kubeadm design and release, and for this proposal, we will add fields to KubeadmControlPlane to remove these node groups and bindings post control plane initialisation.

Reviewer 3: Is there a tracking issue?

> #### Changes to KubeadmControlPlane

Reviewer 9: I was expecting also a section about changes to CAPBK, because I assume that in case of kubelet secure attestation:
- it is required to change defaulting/validation rules for Kubeadm token configuration 
- it is required to skip existing logic for token renewal 

I'm not sure if it is also required to change the generated cloud-init code.

Author: I'll add a section for CAPBK changes to the bootstrap script

```
spec:

>   disableKubeadmAutoApproveClusterRoleBinding: true

Reviewer 3: We should probably find a better name for this field, were any alternatives considered?

@fabriziopandini Thoughts here?

Reviewer 9: I personally prefer to not add fields to the KubeadmConfig root, because it is already a mix of kubeadm config and cloud-init/machine-bootstrap fields and I don't think we should add further concerns on the same bucket.

What about adding a `KubeadmConfig.Security` field, pointing to a struct holding all the security related settings? 

Also, I'm wondering if we should have something like `security.nodeAttestation` instead of `security. disableKubeadmAutoApproveClusterRoleBinding`, so the user will be concerned only to express the final intent, leaving to the system the job to figure out what is required to make it happen.

Reviewer 2: > were any alternatives considered?

Added it mostly as a placeholder that there _should_ be a field of some sort.

Reviewer 2: Changed it to the following with justification.

```
spec:
  security:
    disableKubeadmAutoApproveClusterRoleBinding: true
```

This field on KCP will remove the `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

We do not name the field as related to the Cluster API specific mechanism here since this
setting would also support the use of other mechanisms such as the aws-iam-authenticator or the
GCP cloud provider.

```

> This field on KCP will `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

Reviewer 3: Incomplete sentence?

The node bootstrapper MUST be able to attest the identity of the machine against a chain of trust provided by the hardware or cloud provider.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

### Security Model

Document the intended security model for the proposal, including implications
on the Kubernetes RBAC model. Questions you may want to answer include:

* Does this proposal implement security controls or require the need to do so?
  * If so, consider describing the different roles and permissions with tables.
* Are there adequate security warnings where appropriate (see https://adam.shostack.org/ReederEtAl_NEATatMicrosoft.pdf for guidance)?
* Are regex expressions going to be used, and are their appropriate defenses against DOS?
* Is any sensitive data being stored in a secret, and only exists for as long as necessary?

### Risks and Mitigations

> There may be additional security risks being introduced in this design. In order to mitigate this, this proposal will be taken to SIG Security and SIG Auth for review **before the beta graduation**.

Reviewer 4: i don't see anyone from SIG Auth or SIG Security in the reviewers (might have missed it)
@randomvariable @yastij do you think it's a good idea to have such a third party review?
once this is added as alpha, i can see users starting to use it immediately, in production.

Author: @neolit123 @vincepri - ideally we should add a featuregate for this; I think we can have a proper review from auth/security before going to beta.

Author: @neolit123 @vincepri - ideally we should add a featuregate for this; I think we can have a proper review from auth/security before turning the feature-gate to be always on, thoughts ?

Reviewer 3: We should probably have SIG Auth or Security review it even if it's in alpha, @dims @neolit123 could you help ping the appropriate folks?

Reviewer 4: an FG makes sense to me.

Reviewer 11: we should start with @enj our resident guru :)

Reviewer 4: +1 for @enj 

it would be nice to get a non-VMware review as well.
i will add a TODO to ask next week.

Reviewer 4: i've send pings to the sig-auth and sig-security slack channels.

Reviewer: @vincepri @yastij are we waiting for sig-auth / sig-security reviews before merging the proposal? If so it might delay things quite a bit. Not a problem but we should proceed with v0.4.0 and make sure this is non-blocking.

## Alternatives

#### Implement within the cloud providers instead of Cluster API
Given that there is an existent implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for kubelet registration in that no changes to the assumptions around connectivity between management and workload clusters are required, neither does the signer need to be included as a static pod during control plane instantiation.

#### Implement as authentication webhook, as per aws-iam-authenticator (Amazon EKS)
If attestation was implemented as an authentication webhook, it would be in the critical path for all token-based authentication against the API server. It would also additionally be needed to be set up at workload cluster instantiation via a static pod and API server start up.

## Upgrade Strategy

> for the upgrade strategy please refer to the Cluster API node bootstrapper proposal.

Author: agreed

> for the upgrade strategy please refer to the Cluster API node bootstrapper proposal.

Author: fixed

## Additional Details

### Test Plan [optional]

- E2E tests to be added to AWS, vSphere and Azure providers as each provider implements the signer
- E2E tests to be added for the insecure signers for use with CAPD.
Upgrade tests from latest minor release to latest main branch of Kubernetes

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

#### Graduation to beta
- E2E tests testing upgrades to latest main branch of Kubernetes are required such that Cluster API can make appropriate changes to node registration if kubelet or kubeadm behaviour changes.

- Security review by SIG Auth and SIG Security
#### Graduation to GA

> - Beta for 2 releases

Reviewer 3: What is this assumption based on?

Reviewer 2: This was thin-air boilerplate from the old google doc. Open to suggestions here.

Reviewer 7: I think it will be hard to specify *now* because there seem to be a lot of unknowns about future releases, stability guarantees etc.

- Kubeadm uses TLS bootstrapping for node registration, however the default workflow used by Cluster API uses bootstrap token which allow registration as arbitrary node names.
    - When used in this mode, Kubeadm essentially does “client-side validation” to prevent node hijacking, but this does not mean the token cannot be reused by an attacker within the lifetime of the token to perform a hijack.
    - Cluster API cannot scope a token down to a specific node, because neither bootstrap providers, nor most infrastructure providers know the identity of the node ahead of time.

### Goals

- Provide a bootstrap mechanism that assures secure node registration
- To provide a node registration mechanism that is independent of kubeadm
- Ensure that this can work with any infrastructure provider

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- To change assumptions around management cluster to workload cluster connectivity
- Solve the protection of initial cluster bootstrap secrets for the control plane nodes (see Node Bootstrapper)
- To be a mandatory requirement of using Cluster API

> 

Reviewer 10: Perhaps
```suggestion
- To implement or enable hardware-backed encryption of traffic between worker nodes and the control plane components.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we'll really get that here, and the ways to get hardware encryption working with kubernetes tend to be vendor specific (sticking proxies between everything, or compiling k8s against boringssl to make use of fips modules, etc...).

Reviewer 10: BTW this is a _non_ goal - I'm trying to be explicit about what we won't deliver @randomvariable.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see. Haha. Thx.

#### Provider Specification

##### All providers
- All providers MUST insert a ProviderID within the KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID extension attribute of the CSR
- All signer names MUST be filled in by the provider’s controller in InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner and InfraCluster.Status.KubeletServingCertificateSigner if the attestation controller is running
- All providers SHOULD implement trust-on-first-use type mechanisms to prevent replay attacks

##### Insecure providers
- An insecure provider CANNOT implement certificate rotation or kubelet serving certificate signing
- InfraCluster.Status.KubeletClientCertificateSigner MUST be set to cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure
- An insecure provider MUST use the cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure signer

##### Secure providers
- A secure provider MUST implement certificate rotation and kubelet server certificate signing
- A provider must register signers of:
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-<provider>`

>     - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-<provider>`

Reviewer 10: Will these be easy enough to rename to omit the `x-` when the feature graduates to beta / GA / whenever?

Author: we should be able to graduate those with backfilling and using both values and drop `x-` ones down the road

Reviewer 2: I'm going to defer to @vincepri for some advice here as we're using x.k8s.io elsewhere

- A secure provider MUST implement a secure attestation mechanism, based upon PEM-encoded blocks within the Certificate Signing Request.
- Where a secure provider’s attestation mechanism does not include a nonce or timestamp to protect against replay attacks, the mechanism MUST implement a secondary time-limited attestation (e.g. AWS Instance Identity document + AWS HMACv4 signature).
- A provider’s signer MUST run on the management cluster

##### TPM based providers
- A TPM provider MUST use the following certificate signers
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
- A TPM provider MUST annotate new CSRs as follows:
    - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key

>     - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter)

Reviewer 10: GCP Shielded VMs have multiple key pairs, this would presumably be the signing key?

#### Kubelet authenticator flow

The authenticator will be responsible for both updating the kubelet client and serving certificates.

Both of these decision flows will operate inside the authenticator, and execute whenever called by kubelet to provide client authentication.

##### Client authentication flow

![client auth](images/kubelet-authentication/client-authenticator-flow.png)

##### Serving certificate flow

![serving cert flow](images/kubelet-authentication/serving-certificate-flow.png)

### Risks and Mitigations

There may be additional security risks being introduced in this design. In order to mitigate this, this proposal will be taken to SIG Security and SIG Auth for review **before the beta graduation**.

## Alternatives

#### Implement within the cloud providers instead of Cluster API

> Given that there is an existent implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for kubelet registration in that no changes to the assumptions around connectivity between management and workload clusters are required, neither does the signer need to be included as a static pod during control plane instantiation.

Reviewer 10: Implementing within cluster API also allows mixing cloud and on-premises instances within a single mechanism, which could be useful. It goes without saying that bare-metal on premises systems can't rely on the cloud provider.

| node-attestation-controller | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism. This controller runs as part of the cluster API components in the management cluster | A controller to verify and sign the CSR. This would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR <expand this> approval and start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary. |

#### Kubelet authentication plugin

> We propose a kubelet authentication plugin to be present on the instances, (the kubelet-authenticator CLI will be baked into the machine images through image-builder), which will be responsible for node registration, as well as certificate rotation. The agent will be made up of two parts:

Reviewer 2: Done

> We propose a kubelet authentication plugin to be present on the instances, (the kubelet-authenticator CLI will be baked into the machine images through image-builder), which will be responsible for node registration, as well as certificate rotation. The agent will be made up of two parts:

Reviewer 2: Note, I've had to add some hedging language around how we turn on serving cert bootstrapping for the kubelet pending figuring out if we include KubeletConfiguration in CAPI vs. defaulting an ExtraArg.

    - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key
    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter).

#### Kubeadm
Since this proposal essentially takes over part of the node registration process from kubeadm, we will require the following changes:
- kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up ClusterRoleBindings between the system:nodes group and the `system:certificates.k8s.io:certificatesigningrequests:selfnodeclient` permission, so that certificate renewals must go through re-attestation.
- Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.
This is deferred to a future Kubeadm design and release, and for this proposal, we will add fields to KubeadmControlPlane to remove these node groups and bindings post control plane initialisation.

The idea is to rely the [exec mechanism](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#configuration) of kubeconfigs with local cache directory, when kubelet wants to talk to the apiserver it will call on the kubelet authenticator to get a client certificate.

> #### Changes to KubeadmControlPlane

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Changes to Cluster
```

```
spec:
  security:

>     disableKubeadmAutoApproveClusterRoleBinding: true

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    kubeletAuthentication: true
```

Reviewer 3: TODO @randomvariable To add a description to this field in KCP about side effects and what this field does

```

This field on KCP will remove the `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

We do not name the field as related to the Cluster API specific mechanism here since this
setting would also support the use of other mechanisms such as the aws-iam-authenticator or the
GCP cloud provider.

#### Changes to CAPBK

> the bootstrap process will change to accomodate the new attestation process and ensure backward compatibility, in particular, the bootstrapping will look if `nodeadm` is present on the machine. If it's the case, the bootstrap would use node attestation. If `nodeadm` is not available, we would fallback on older bootstrapping flow. This would enable supporting the existing/older kubernetes versions and machine images built for it.

Reviewer 3: TODO @yastij to reword this text

      - [Implement as authentication webhook, as per aws-iam-authenticator (Amazon EKS)](#implement-as-authentication-webhook-as-per-aws-iam-authenticator-amazon-eks)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
      - [Graduation to beta](#graduation-to-beta)
      - [Graduation to GA](#graduation-to-ga)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

- **OID:** Object Identifier defined by the International Telecommunications Union and used in PKI to identify attributes on certificates.

- **PKI:** Public Key Infrastructure

- **TPM:** Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a specification defined by the Trusted Computing Group (TCG) that allows hosts to attest to their identity via PKI and a secure crypto-processor which may either be a separate chip, built into the CPU or a virtual device provided by the hypervisor.

> - **Trust on first use:** Often abbreviated to TOFO is a authentication convention that a provided credential is only trusted from one

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- **Trust on first use:** Often abbreviated to TOFO is an authentication convention that a provided credential is only trusted from one
```

>   endpoint which is recorded, and if presented again from differ endpoint is untrusted. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trust_on_first_use

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  endpoint which is recorded, and if presented again from a different endpoint it is untrusted. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trust_on_first_use
```

  for more information.

## Summary

This proposal outlines a method to secure node registration within Cluster API, to solve 2 primary problems:
- Solve a class of attacks involving node impersonation allowing an attacker to access secrets and volumes they shouldn’t by using hardware attestation of node identity.

> - Reduce kubeadm token reuse in MachinePools where the cloud provider does not support continuous update of the bootstrap userdata without creating new cloud provider specific machinepool resources (e.g. AWS Launch Configurations).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Reduce kubeadm token reuse in MachinePools where the cloud provider does not support continuous update of the bootstrap userdata without creating new cloud provider specific MachinePool resources (e.g. AWS Launch Configurations).
```

This node attestation mechanism will be optional in the initial implementation, and can potentially be used independently of Cluster API.

## Motivation

Cluster API default core components are largely reliant on kubeadm for cluster bootstrapping and node registration. Kubeadm is a platform-agnostic command line tool designed to assist users to bootstrap Kubernetes clusters, and is used as a building block in Cluster API.
Because kubeadm is platform-independent and is intended to provide an “easy path” to cluster bootstrapping,  there are a number of inherent design decisions that limit the overall security of the provisioned cluster:
- Kubeadm uses TLS bootstrapping for node registration, however the default workflow used by Cluster API uses bootstrap token which allow registration as arbitrary node names.

>     - When used in this mode, Kubeadm essentially does “client-side validation” to prevent node hijacking, but this does not mean the token cannot be reused by an attacker within the lifetime of the token to perform a hijack.

Reviewer 12: Trying to understand what "hijack" means here. Is it correct that -- assuming the attacker has gotten hold of the token before it has expired, the attacker then uses that token to add one or more nodes to the cluster? In this case the attacker has not really hijacked an existing node but rather injected "malicious" nodes into the cluster. I may be missing something.

Reviewer 2: I've added a clarification. You can take on the identity of an existing node - including a control plane node.

| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | node-attestation-controller | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism. This controller runs as part of the cluster API components in the management cluster | A controller to verify and sign the CSR. This would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR approval and start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary. |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| node-attestation-controller | Part of Cluster API repository, under bootstrap/node/attestation, and imported by Cluster API infra providers for implementation. A generic challenge-response implementation will be included for providers / bare metal without an attestation mechanism. This controller runs as part of the Cluster API components in the management cluster | A controller to verify and sign the CSR. This would be typically an importable controller where the infrastructure provider implements the interface with specific code for CSR approval and start the controller as part of its main.go or through an independent binary. |
```

Reviewer 2: Incredible work parsing the markdown table

| 2.1.21     | KubernetesNodeProviderIdentifierOID | An identifier for the machine, should be the same or a derivative of the node provider ID. This is the equivalent of Google’s CloudComputeInstanceIdentifierOID, which we can reuse for a proof of concept (1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.1.21). |

#### CSR PEM Blocks

The following blocks will be added to CSRs following Section 2 of [RFC7468].

| Block Name                                 | Description                                          |
| ------------------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| KUBELET AUTHENTICATOR ATTESTATION PROVIDER | string describing the attestation provider           |
| KUBELET AUTHENTICATOR ATTESTATION DATA     | the actual attestation data to perform validation on |

#### Attestation data

Attestation data will be appended with the following headers and footers and MUST
be base64 encoded.

Example CSR:
```
-----BEGIN ATTESTATION DATA-----
S25vd2luZyBtZSBBbGFuIFBhcnRyaWRnZSwga25vd2luZyB5b3UgS3ViZXJuZXRlcyBjbHVzdGVyLCBhaGEh
-----END ATTESTATION DATA-----
```

> The format of the attestation block is left to the provider. The Appendix section provides examples.

Reviewer 7: I think the Appendix section is missing

Reviewer 2: Going to defer to infra provider proposals for those. Was in the google doc version.

#### Kubelet serving certificate rotation daemon

In the first attempt, we will attempt to run serving certificate rotation as part of the client authenticator - it will

> check for the existence of the serving certificate files, their validity (e.g. not self signed), or request a new serving certificate. Once the new serving certificate is written, kubelet can be restarted.

Reviewer 7: Just to avoid misunderstandings. Requesting a new serving certificate is done when the serving certs don't exist or are not valid anymore?

Reviewer 2: This was all incorrect, so it's gone.

> We may however find that it is better suited to run as a windows service manager service on the node, but its lifecycle management would be out of scope for now.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We may however find that it is better suited to run as a Windows service manager service on the node, but its lifecycle management would be out of scope for now.
```

> There is a un untracked effort to make components automatically reload when certificates are changed, and will follow up

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
There is an untracked effort to make components automatically reload when certificates are changed, and will follow up
```
(in case we want to keep this sentence this way)

- Where a secure provider’s attestation mechanism does not include a nonce or timestamp to protect against replay attacks, the mechanism MUST implement a secondary time-limited attestation (e.g. AWS Instance Identity document + AWS HMACv4 signature).
- A provider’s signer MUST run on the management cluster.

##### TPM based providers
- A TPM provider MUST use the following certificate signers
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm`
    - `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
- A TPM provider MUST annotate new CSRs as follows:
    - Key: cluster-x-k8s-io/tpm-endorsement-key
    - Value: Platform-specific endorsement key (e.g., retrieved from GCP Shielded VM API or VMware vCenter).

#### Kubeadm
Since this proposal essentially takes over part of the node registration process from kubeadm, we will require the following changes:
- kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up ClusterRoleBindings between the system:nodes group and the `system:certificates.k8s.io:certificatesigningrequests:selfnodeclient` permission, so that certificate renewals must go through re-attestation.

> - Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- Kubeadm COULD allow opt-out of kubeadm setting up `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` ClusterRoleBinding.
```
(same below somewhere)

This is deferred to a future Kubeadm design and release, and for this proposal, we will add fields to KubeadmControlPlane to remove these node groups and bindings post control plane initialisation.

> The idea is to rely the [exec mechanism](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#configuration) of kubeconfigs with local cache directory, when kubelet wants to talk to the apiserver it will call on the kubelet authenticator to get a client certificate.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The idea is to relay the [exec mechanism](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#configuration) of kubeconfigs with local cache directory, when kubelet wants to talk to the apiserver it will call on the kubelet authenticator to get a client certificate.
```

Reviewer 2: Rewritten

#### Changes to Cluster

```
spec:
  security:
    kubeletAuthentication: true
```

#### Changes to KCP

The cluster field if set will be read by KCP and remove the `kubeadm:node-autoapprove-bootstrap` cluster role binding.

A new role binding will be set up to ensure CSRs can still be submitted successfully.

> #### Changes to CAPBK

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
#### Changes to CABPK
```

Reviewer 7: Also somewhere below again

If the kubeletAuthentication field is set for the cluster, CABPK will

> default `--rotate-server-certificates` on NodeRegistrationOptions.ExtraArgs for the Kubeadm

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
default `--rotate-server-certificates` on NodeRegistrationOptions.ExtraArgs for the kubeadm
```

configuration. If KubeletConfiguration is supported within Cluster API v1alpha4, we
will opt to set ServerTLSBootstrap on KubeletConfiguration instead.

CABPK will also update the runcmds for cloud-init / Ignition such that the Kubelet kubeconfig
has the kubelet authentication plugin in exec. This is subject to experimentation,

> and may not be required, however, if this the kubeconfig is built into image builder.

Reviewer 7: I think the last part of the sentence doesn't make sense

Reviewer 2: Cleaned text up.

#### Kubelet authenticator flow

> The authenticator will be responsible for both updating the kubelet client certificates only.

Reviewer 7: both and only does not seem to fit together

Reviewer 2: Resolved.

##### Client CSR flow

![client auth](images/kubelet-authentication/client-authenticator-flow.png)

##### Serving CSR handling

For the Kubelet serving certificate, we intend to enable serving certificate TLS bootstrapping on Kubelet via the ServerTLSBootstrap settings of Kubelet's configuration.

This will cause Kubelet to not generate a self-signed certificate for serving and instead
submit CSRs for the initial certificate and rotation to the API server.

The attestation controller will validate the following:

* CSR spec.username field is of the form system:node:<nodeName> and spec.groups contains system:nodes

> * Only contains digital signature, sever auth and key encipherment usages.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Only contains digital signature, server auth and key encipherment usages.
```

## Alternatives

#### Implement within the cloud providers instead of Cluster API
Given that there is an existent implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for kubelet registration in that no changes to the assumptions around connectivity between management and workload clusters are required, neither does the signer need to be included as a static pod during control plane instantiation.

#### Implement as authentication webhook, as per aws-iam-authenticator (Amazon EKS)
If attestation was implemented as an authentication webhook, it would be in the critical path for all token-based authentication against the API server. It would also additionally be needed to be set up at workload cluster instantiation via a static pod and API server start up.

## Upgrade Strategy

upgrades should be transparent for users:

- upgrading cluster API components shouldn't have effects on existing clusters

> - upgrading workload clusters should also work fine, as CAPBK would supply a bootstrap script in v1alpha4 and the current one when it's running in v1alpha3

Reviewer 7: ```
supply a bootstrap script in v1alpha4 and the current one when it's running in v1alpha3
```
I don't get how this part is meant

## Additional Details

### Test Plan [optional]

- E2E tests to be added to AWS, vSphere and Azure providers as each provider implements the signer
- E2E tests to be added for the insecure signers for use with CAPD.
Upgrade tests from latest minor release to latest main branch of Kubernetes

### Graduation Criteria [optional]

#### Graduation to beta
- E2E tests testing upgrades to latest main branch of Kubernetes are required such that Cluster API can make appropriate changes to node registration if kubelet or kubeadm behaviour changes.

- Security review by SIG Auth and SIG Security
#### Graduation to GA
- Beta for 2 releases
- Optionally, external security review of the combined Cluster API and kubeadm model.

### Version Skew Strategy [optional]

> There shouldn’t be any version skew issues between  and the bootstrapper, as the only interaction between the two is through the CSR API.

Reviewer 7: There is a word missing after `between`

Reviewer 2: Deleted the sentence.

#### Attestation data

Attestation data will be appended with the following headers and footers and MUST
be base64 encoded.

Example CSR:
```
-----BEGIN ATTESTATION DATA-----
S25vd2luZyBtZSBBbGFuIFBhcnRyaWRnZSwga25vd2luZyB5b3UgS3ViZXJuZXRlcyBjbHVzdGVyLCBhaGEh
-----END ATTESTATION DATA-----
```
The format of the attestation block is left to the provider.

#### Core Specification
- Core Cluster API MUST provide the following implementations of CSRs and signers:
  - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-insecure` which implement an “Always Allow” type
    signer that provides equivalent security to Cluster API v1alpha3. This is only to be used for
    providers where no secure mechanism exists.

- Core Cluster API MIGHT provide the following implementations of CSRs and signers:
  - `cluster.x-k8s.io/kube-apiserver-client-kubelet-tpm` and `cluster-x-k8s-io/kubelet-serving-tpm`
    - Will implement TPM-based certificate signers and requesters based on the cloud-provider-gcp
    implementation. - However, since the mechanism for retrieving endorsement keys varies across
    platforms, the TPM signer will additionally require a provider specific mechanism to provide the

>     TPM Endorsement Key.

Reviewer 13: IIUC, the endorsement key can't be used for signing. You need to use the attestation key. To prove that the node has the expected EK, you need a challenge-response protocol.

Reviewer 2: Taking a look at the Bloomberg SPIRE plugin. The challenge response model seems a good improvement on the K8s GCP Cloud Provider and we have a way to do it I think.

Reviewer 2: The text should have read `the TPM signer will additionally require a provider specific mechanism to provide the TPM Endorsement Key's Certificate Authority`, but yes, following the GCP implementation, we'd be generating an AIK (links to both the GCP and SPIRE implementations have been added). We're not going to implement TPM right away, the POC will start with the AWS and Azure attestors to fix ASG implementations, so a more detailed TPM proposal will follow.

There may be additional security risks being introduced in this design. In order to mitigate this,
this proposal will be taken to SIG Security and SIG Auth for review **before the beta graduation**.

## Alternatives

#### Implement within the cloud providers instead of Cluster API
Given that there is an existent implementation in cloud-provider-gcp, this could be extended to all
of the cloud providers. However, there are some advantages to making Cluster API responsible for
kubelet registration in that no changes to the assumptions around connectivity between management
and workload clusters are required, neither does the signer need to be included as a static pod
during control plane instantiation.

#### Implement as authentication webhook, as per aws-iam-authenticator (Amazon EKS)
If attestation was implemented as an authentication webhook, it would be in the critical path for
all token-based authentication against the API server. It would also additionally be needed to be
set up at workload cluster instantiation via a static pod and API server start up.

#### SPIRE/SPIFFE

SPIFFE (Secure Production Identity Framework for Everyone), and it's open source implementation in

> SPIRE form a set of standard and frameworks for workload identity which is independent of any

Reviewer 14: minor nit
```suggestion
SPIRE form a set of standard frameworks for workload identity which is independent of any
```
